---
title: The Second Confiscation Act
date: July 17, 1862
---

CHAP. CXCV.---*An Act to suppress Insurrection, to punish Treason and
Rebellion, to seize and confiscate the Property of Rebels, and for other
Purposes*.

*Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled*, That every person who shall
hereafter commit the crime of treason against the United States, and
shall be adjudged guilty thereof, shall suffer death, and all his
slaves, if any, shall be declared and made free; or, at the discretion
of the court, he shall be imprisoned for not less than five years and
fined not less than ten thousand dollars, and all his slaves, if any,
shall be declared and made free; said fine shall be levied and collected
on any or all of the property, real and personal, excluding slaves, of
which the said person so convicted was the owner at the time of
committing the said crime, any sale or conveyance to the contrary
notwithstanding. ...

SEC. 5. *And be it further enacted*, That, to insure the speedy
termination of the present rebellion, it shall be the duty of the
President of the United States to cause the seizure of all the estate
and property, money, stocks, credits, and effects of the persons
hereinafter named in this section [Confederate officials] ...

SEC. 9. *And be it further enacted*, That all slaves of persons who
shall hereafter be engaged in rebellion against the government of the
United States, or who shall in any way give aid or comfort thereto,
escaping from such persons and taking refuge within the lines of the
army; and all slaves captured from such persons or deserted by them and
coming under the control of the government of the United States; and all
slaves of such person found on [*or*] being within any place occupied by
rebel forces and afterwards occupied by the forces of the United States,
shall be deemed captives of war, and shall be forever free of their
servitude, and not again held as slaves.

SEC. 10. *And be it further enacted*, That no slave escaping into any
State, Territory, or the District of Columbia, from any other State,
shall be delivered up, or in any way impeded or hindered of his liberty,
except for crime, or some offence against the laws, unless the person
claiming said fugitive shall first make oath that the person to whom the
labor or service of such fugitive is alleged to be due is his lawful
owner, and has not borne arms against the United States in the present
rebellion, nor in any way given aid and comfort thereto; and no person
engaged in the military or naval service of the United States shall,
under any pretence whatever, assume to decide on the validity of the
claim of any person to the service or labor of any other person, or
surrender up any such person to the claimant, on pain of being dismissed
from the service.

SEC. 11. *And be it further enacted*, That the President of the United
States is authorized to employ as many persons of African descent as he
may deem necessary and proper for the suppression of this rebellion, and
for this purpose he may organize and use them in such manner as he may
judge best for the public welfare.

SEC. 12. *And be it further enacted*, That the President of the United
States is hereby authorized to make provision for the transportation,
colonization, and settlement, in some tropical country beyond the limits
of the United States, of such persons of the African race, made free by
the provisions of this act, as may be willing to emigrate, having first
obtained the consent of the government of said country to their
protection and settlement within the same, with all the rights and
privileges of freemen. ...

APPROVED, July 17, 1862.

-----

*Source:* U.S., Statutes at Large, Treaties, and Proclamations of the United
States of America, vol. 12 (Boston, 1863), pp. 589â€“92, available online at
<http://www.freedmen.umd.edu/conact2.htm>.
