---
title: Letter to Silas H. Stringham, Commander of the North Atlantic Squadron
author: O. S. Glisson
date: July 15, 1861
---

Rappahanock [Va.]

Sir I have to report, that this morning at daylight we observed a boat
adrift near Stingaree Light House and soon after discovered a man in the
Light house. We manned a boat, armed her, and sent her with an officer
to pick up the boat, and to ascertain who was in the Light House

At 8^h^ 30^m^ the boat returned bringing with her six Negroes who had
deserted from the shore during the night and taken shelter in the Light
House casting their boat adrift to avoid detection

They appear to be very much frightened and state that the people on
shore are about arming the Negroes with the intention of placing them in
the front of Battle. their taking this course has caused much excitement
among the negro population, who are deserting in every direction. Two
other boats made their escape last night in the hope of being picked up
by some Vessel passing in the Bay

I have rationed these Negroes on board of this Vessel, until I receive
orders from you as to their disposal. They inform me that there is not a
Union man near the entrance of the River. A few weeks since they
murdered the only Union man near Stingaree Point.^[Glisson means
Confederates, not the "six Negroes," had murdered the only Unionist in
the area.] His widow M^rs^ George Wilson, with three little children are
yet on the Farm near the Point, they are apparently unmolested.

These negroes further inform me, that ammunition is very scarce, and
that the five hundred men in Mathews County have not two rounds of
Cartridges with them. these men are about ten miles from Stingaree Point
and are the nearest armed force in this vicinity.

Enclosed I forward you a list of these Slaves together with a list of
the names of their owners. I am sir very respectfully Your Obedient
Servant, O.S. Glisson^[Glisson was the commanding officer of the U.S.S.
*Mount Vernon*.]

  List of slaves       Owners
  -------------------- -----------------
  John Hunter          Joseph Moore
  Samuel Hunter        
  Miles Hunter         
  Peter Hunter         J. Crittenden
  Alexander Franklin   Robert R Carter
  David Harris         Jeremiah Harron


