---
title: Orders to Benjamin Butler
author: Simon Cameron
date: August 8, 1861
---

Maj. Gen. B. F. Butler,\
*Commanding Department of Virginia, Fortress Monroe.*

GENERAL: The important question of the proper disposition to be made of
fugitives from service in States in insurrection against the Federal
Government to which you have again directed my attention in your letter
of July 30 has received my most attentive consideration.

It is the desire of the President that all existing rights in all the
States be fully respected and maintained. The war now prosecuted on the
part of the Federal Government is a war for the Union and for the
preservation of all constitutional rights of States and the citizens of
the States in the Union. Hence no question can arise as to fugitives
from service within the States and Territories in which the authority of
the Union is fully acknowledged. The ordinary forms of judicial
proceeding which must be respected by military and civil authorities
alike will suffice for the enforcement of all legal claims. But in
States wholly or partially under insurrectionary control where the laws
of the United States are so far opposed and resisted that they cannot be
effectually enforced it is obvious that rights dependent on the
execution of those laws must temporarily fail; and it is equally obvious
that rights dependent on the laws of the States within which military
operations are conducted must be necessarily subordinated to the
military exigencies created by the insurrection if not wholly forfeited
by the treasonable conduct of parties claiming them. To this general
rule rights to services can form no exception.

The act of Congress approved August 6, 1861, declares that if persons
held to service shall be employed in hostility to the United States the
right to their services shall be forfeited and such persons shall be
discharged therefrom.^[Cameron refers here to the so-called "First
Confiscation Act."] It follows of necessity that no claim can be
recognized by the military authorities of the Union to the services of
such persons when fugitives.

A more difficult question is presented in respect to persons escaping
from the service of loyal masters. It is quite apparent that the laws of
the State under which only the services of such fugitives can be claimed
must needs be wholly or almost wholly suspended, as to remedies, by the
insurrection and the military measures necessitated by it.^[Like many
Republicans, Cameron believed that slavery could only exist as a
creature of explicit state and local law.] And it is equally apparent
that the substitution of military for judicial measures for the
enforcement of such claims must be attended by great inconvenience,
embarrassments and injuries.

Under these circumstances it seems quite clear that the substantial
rights of loyal masters will be best protected by receiving such
fugitives as well as fugitives from disloyal masters into the service of
the United States, and employing them under such organizations and in
such occupations as circumstances may suggest or require. Of course a
record should be kept showing the name and description of the fugitive,
and the name and the character as loyal or disloyal of the master, and
such facts as may be necessary to a correct understanding of the
circumstances of each case after tranquility shall have been restored.
Upon the return of peace Congress will doubtless properly provide for
all the persons thus received into the service of the Union and for just
compensation to loyal masters. In this way only it would seem can the
duty and safety of the Government and the just rights of all be fully
reconciled and harmonized.

You will therefore consider yourself as instructed to govern your future
action in respect to fugitives from service by the principles herein
stated, and will report from time to time---and at least twice in each
month---your action in the premises to this Department.^[Although these
orders were addressed to Butler, Cameron later copied them to
generals in other departments.] You will, however, neither authorize nor
permit any interference by the troops under your command with the
servants of peaceful citizens in house or field, nor will you in any way
encourage such servants to leave the lawful service of their masters,
nor will you except in cases where the public safety may seem to require
prevent the voluntary return of any fugitive to the service from which
he may have escaped.

I am, general, very respectfully, your obedient servant,

SIMON CAMERON\
*Secretary of War.*

-----

*Source:* *The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records
of the Union and Confederate Armies*, series 2, volume 1, 761-762, online at
<http://texashistory.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metapth139682/m1/770/>
