% The Nineteenth-Century U. S. Field
% Prof. Caleb McDaniel
% August 13, 2012

These guidelines are intended for doctoral students who plan to be
examined on the Nineteenth-Century United States, either as their major
field or as a secondary one. The field is aimed particularly at those who
specialize in social, cultural, and/or intellectual history, but other
specializations are allowed. Some additional requirements may be
appropriate for those who plan to major in this field and complete a
dissertation under my primary direction. But all students completing a
comprehensive examination with me should follow, at a minimum, the
course outlined here.

Coursework
----------

You must take HIST 588 (Readings in Nineteenth-Century America) and at
least one other graduate seminar with me. Currently the other main
course I offer is HIST 587 (a research seminar on Methods in U. S.
Social/Cultural History). I usually offer these seminars in alternate
years. I will consider requests for an additional one-on-one Directed
Readings course on a case-by-case basis, but the field may and usually
will be completed without one.

General Themes
--------------

Each student will of course bring different interests to this field, and
the exam will reflect those interests above all. But there are several
overarching themes that you should think about throughout your reading
on this field, as they will likely come up in classes, in one-on-one
meetings, and on exams. Both have to do with the boundaries of the field
of U. S. history in this period.

-   *Periodization.* Does it make sense to write, research, and teach
    about the nineteenth century as a discrete unit of time,
    particularly for American historians? Both in their professional
    organizations and scholarly work, American historians often treat
    the Civil War as a fulcrum on which the century and the nation
    turned. What are the reasons for this, and what reasons might be
    given for thinking otherwise? What changes and continuities across
    the nineteenth century make this field "thinkable," and what dates
    or events might meaningfully bound the period?
-   *Geography.* Although this field concerns "the United States" in the
    nineteenth century, the territorial boundaries of the nation---the
    very definition of the United States---changed dramatically during
    this period. What accounted for these changes, and what role did
    territorial changes play in explaining other transformations in
    American life? Are these geographical changes best described as part
    of a master program of "expansion" and "empire" or as unforeseen
    consequences contingent on events beyond the nation's control?
    Recent works in transnational history have also urged historians of
    the period to look beyond the nation's territorial boundaries and
    explore the place of the nineteenth-century United States in the
    world at large. How did events outside the nation's geographical
    borders affect events within or across them, and vice versa?
-   *Teaching.* Although much of the reading you do will be focused on
    scholarly debates about matters large and small, the field should
    also prepare you to teach about the nineteenth century. How will the
    readings that you do shape the way you teach American history (even
    about other periods)? Keep in mind here that "teaching" can be
    broadly defined, and is not confined to education that takes place
    in the classroom; this question would apply equally well if you plan
    to work in public history or in any field where you will have to
    explain or interpret the nineteenth century to audiences who are not
    as familiar with it as specialists in the field.

**Tip:** When lost in a thicket of books, it can be difficult to pull
back and think about these big, forest-sized themes. One thing that can
help is to continually ask yourself: *How would I organize an
undergraduate course or a museum exhibit on the nineteenth-century
United States?* Your answer to that question will likely change as you
read new books and encounter new topics, but periodically jotting notes
to yourself about this will force you to wrestle with all three of the
big themes listed above, particularly by forcing you to be selective
about what you would include or emphasize in the confines of a course or
an exhibit. Think not only about *what* topics you would select, but
also how you would organize them and justify your choices.

Additional Objectives
---------------------

Individual seminars will have expectations and objectives particular to
those courses. But there are several general objectives you should aim
towards as you prepare for your field exam including:

-   competence in the writing of concise, yet analytical, summaries of
    books, using academic book reviews as your rough model
-   familiarity with the use of digital research tools, including both
    bibliographic databases and the rapidly multiplying databases of
    digitized nineteenth-century sources---as well as familiarity with
    both the promise and the perils of these sorts of tools
-   the ability to identify historiographical relationships between
    books, including areas of broad agreement or disagreement among
    scholars, as well as to formulate new questions for research that
    still need to be addressed

Assignments
-----------

For the most part, the assignments given here are *additional to* the
requirements for individual courses that you may take with me. There may
be students in those courses who are not completing a field exam; to
prepare for the field exam requires additional work that will not be
spelled out on course syllabi. However, in some cases, meeting a
requirement for a course may satisfy or overlap with part of the
requirements outlined below. I've tried to note when this is the case,
but see me if you have any questions.

### Readings

For your examination, you will be responsible for mastery of a reading
list consisting of the following:

-   Every book or article you read as part of the requirements for HIST
    588.
-   An additional 12 to 15 books that you will select from the
    "individual reading" lists on the HIST 588 syllabus, distributed
    across at least *five* of the thematic lists on the syllabus (e.g.,
    class, race, empire, etc.)
-   Approximately 15 to 20 books that you will select related to a
    particular sub-area of concentration important to your eventual
    dissertation work, which could be defined topically (i.e.,
    immigration history) or methodologically (i.e., intellectual
    history).

Past syllabi from HIST 588 are on my website at
<http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/teaching.html>. You should use the syllabus
from the semester when you took the course to satisfy the above
requirements.

You may also add to your reading list any books you have read for other
fields that you believe would be relevant to this one. While I will not
focus specifically on asking about these works in the exam, they may
help both of us to see your broad patterns of interest and areas of
emerging expertise.

It is probable that you will read a number of books and articles in the
course of research for a seminar paper with me, and these books may well
appear on your reading list as part of your special "area of
concentration." If, however, the reading for your seminar paper deals
with a specific subject you do not plan to pursue further, or if it had
to be (for the purposes of the paper) narrowly focused, I may recommend
that you still identify a separate area of concentration for your list.

Rather than compiling this list all at once, you should maintain and
update the list throughout your work on the field. This could be as
simple as keeping a webpage or Google document with a running list of
your readings, but it may be more efficient to use bibliographic
software like [Zotero](http://www.zotero.org) to keep track of
citations, since this would allow you to easily retrieve the books
you've read or the notes you've taken. Ask other graduate students about
how they organized their notes and reading lists, or consult online
guides like Cameron Blevins's posts on "Surviving Quals."[^1]

### Blog Posts

Once you decide to pursue this field, you should create a professional
blog or website (if you don't have one already). It is easy to do so at
<http://blogs.rice.edu>. On this blog you should publish a short post
(no more than about 500 words) for each of the books on your reading
list as you complete them. This will help you to prepare for the exam;
give you a record of your thoughts; and help you to practice summarizing
and connecting books together. It will also help me to keep track of
your progress on the field so that I can make suggestions about readings
or questions to consider.

You are not required to make these blog posts public; it is possible to
set the privacy controls so that only you and I will be able to see
them. However, I would encourage you to consider keeping some public
record of your work, both to help you begin developing a professional
identity and to force yourself to move from the fragmentary notes you
will keep for yourself towards writing that is meant for public
consumption.

### Meetings

Once you have decided to complete this field, plan on setting up a
meeting with me at the beginning and the end of each semester in which
you are working on the field. At these informal "briefings" and
"debriefings" we can confer about (and eventually finalize) your reading
list; plan or look back on your semester; check in on your progress;
identify research interests; determine when you might be ready to take
the exam; and discuss the sorts of questions that the exam could cover.

For a few students it may make sense to have additional one-on-one
meetings as part of a Directed Readings course in your second or third
year, just prior to taking the written exam. I will consider requests
for such a course only on a case-by-case basis, but whether you take a
directed readings course or not, you should still plan to have two
sit-down meetings with me each semester.

Format of Exam
--------------

In most cases the written exam will be an open-book and open-note
historiographical essay that you will have 24 hours to complete. You
will be provided with at least two prompts and allowed to choose one as
the basis of your essay.

Acknowledgements
----------------

Thanks to Rachel Herrmann (@Raherrmann), Luke Dietrich (@Luke_Dietrich), Lynn
Price (@Lprice3), and Erin N. Bush (@HistoriErin) for feedback on an earlier
draft of these guidelines. Please feel free to email me your own suggestions
and questions, too.

[^1]: See Part I at
    <http://historying.org/2012/01/11/surviving-quals-part-i-laying-the-groundwork/>
    and Part II at
    <http://historying.org/2012/01/23/surviving-quals-part-ii-the-grind/>.
